# Tutorial

This tutorial demonstrates how to create a basic workflow for handling purchase requests within a company using the `django-fsm-ticket` library. Make sure that you have followed all the steps in the [Getting started](../README.md#getting-started) section: install `django-fsm-ticket`, create a new Django project, and configure your `settings.py` and `urls.py` files. 

> [!NOTE]  
> We encourage you to start a project from scratch by following our tutorial.
> However, you can also find the final result of this tutorial in the `example_project` folder.


## Creating an app

As a first step, we need to create a Django app for our models:

```bash
$ python manage.py startapp purchase
```

Don't forget to add `purchase` to your `INSTALLED_APPS` list in `settings.py`. Also add login-related configuration:

```python
# settings.py

INSTALLED_APPS = [
    # ...
    "polymorphic",
    "django_fsm_ticket",
    "purchase",
    # ...
]

LOGIN_URL = "/login"
LOGIN_REDIRECT_URL = "home"
LOGOUT_REDIRECT_URL = "home"
```

## Defining states

Now we need to conceptualize our workflow, modeling it as a Finite State Automaton. As a first step, we define the states of our workflow. Don't worry, we can modify states later, as we refine our analysis. Here is a description of our process:

- An employee (any user) opens a ticket to request an item purchase.
- An admin (a superuser) either approves or rejects the request.
- The employee can cancel the request before the item has been purchased.
- If approved, a superuser orders the item from a seller, taking note of the price and the seller's name.
- When the purchase is complete, a superuser attaches the invoice and closes the ticket.
- At any time, any involved user can add a comment to the ticket.

Thus, our states will be:

- `new`: a purchase request has just been created.
- `approved`: a superuser approved the request.
- `rejected`: a superuser rejected the request (it is a final state).
- `ordered`: the item has been ordered from a seller.
- `purchased`: the item has been purchased (it is a final state).
- `canceled`: the requester canceled the request (it is a final state).

Let's define our states using a Django model. In `purchase/models.py`, we define a class that extends `Ticket`:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket
from django.db import models


class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    root_name = 'purchase'

    verbose_states = {
        'new': "New",
        'rejected': "Rejected",
        'approved': "Approved",
        'ordered': "Ordered",
        'purchased': "Purchased",
        'canceled': "Canceled",
    }

    closed_states = {'rejected', 'canceled', 'purchased'}
```

Here:

- `root_name` is a name for identifying our workflow. You may have several workflows in your Django project, each with a unique name. The base URL for tickets of the flow will be `.../tickets/<root_name>`, e.g. [http://localhost:8000/ticket/purchase](http://localhost:8000/ticket/purchase) in this example.
- `verbose_states` is a dict mapping state names to verbose names. Verbose names will appear in your user interface and may be localized.
- `closed_states` is a set of "final" states, where the ticket is considered closed, thus disappearing from the list of open tickets in the user interface.

Note that, by default, a ticket is created with a default (start) state of `'new'`, so you should always define a state named `'new'`. You can change this behavior by overriding the state field in your `Ticket` model.


## Registering our workflow

To let `django-fsm-ticket` know that we are defining a workflow, we need to register our model `PurchaseTicket` by creating a `TicketEngine` instance:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine

# ...

purchase_ticket_engine = TicketEngine(
    TicketClass=PurchaseTicket,
)
```


## Creating a base template

The user interface for our workflow is automatically generated by `django-fsm-ticket`. The library expects that a base template named `base.html` has been defined, which meets the following requirements:

- Bootstrap 5
- A block named `centered_container`, which will be replaced by the generated HTML (ticket list, ticket contents, etc.)

For the sake of our tutorial, you can simply copy the following code:

```html
<!-- purchase/templates/base.html -->

{% load i18n %}
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8">
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
	<title>Demo site for django-fsm-ticket</title>

	<!-- Bootstrap core CSS -->
	<link rel="stylesheet"
				href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.2/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css"
				integrity="sha384-T3c6CoIi6uLrA9TneNEoa7RxnatzjcDSCmG1MXxSR1GAsXEV/Dwwykc2MPK8M2HN"
				crossorigin="anonymous">
	<meta name="theme-color" content="#7952b3">

</head>
<body>

<div
		class="d-flex flex-column flex-md-row align-items-center p-3 px-md-4 mb-3 bg-light border-bottom box-shadow justify-content-between">
	<h5 class="my-0 mr-md-auto font-weight-normal">
		<a href="/" style="color: black; text-decoration: none">
			Demo site for django-fsm-ticket
		</a>
	</h5>
	<div>
		{% if not user.is_authenticated %}
		<a class="btn btn-primary btn-sm" href="{% url 'login' %}" type="button">
      {% trans "Login" %}
    </a>
		{% else %}
		<span class="btn-default btn-xs" style="margin: 0 10px 0 10px; color: white; font-weight: bold; font-size: 14px">
      <a href="{% url 'change_password' %}">{{ request.user.username }}</a>
    </span>
		<form class="d-inline" action="{% url 'logout' %}" method="post">
			{% csrf_token %}
			<button class="btn btn-primary btn-sm" type="submit">
        {% trans "Logout" %}
			</button>
		</form>
		{% endif %}
	</div>
</div>

<div class="col-lg-8 mx-auto p-3 py-md-5">
	<main>
		{% block content %}
		{% block centered_container %}
		{% endblock %}
		{% endblock %}
	</main>

	<footer class="pt-5 my-5 text-muted border-top">
		&copy; {% now "Y" %} Fondazione Ugo Bordoni
	</footer>
</div>

<script
		src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.2/dist/js/bootstrap.bundle.min.js"
		integrity="sha384-C6RzsynM9kWDrMNeT87bh95OGNyZPhcTNXj1NW7RuBCsyN/o0jlpcV8Qyq46cDfL"
		crossorigin="anonymous"></script>

</body>
</html>
```

Since our template expects the existence of 'login', 'logout' and 'password_change' as URL names, we need to set up these URLs. In `urls.py`:

```python
# urls.py

from django.contrib.auth.views import LoginView, LogoutView, PasswordChangeView

urlpatterns = [
    #...
    path("login", LoginView.as_view(), name="login"),
    path("logout", LogoutView.as_view(), name="logout"),
    path("change_password", PasswordChangeView.as_view(), name='change_password'),
    # ...
]
```


## Loading our page

Let's prepare and apply our migrations, and launch our site!

```bash
$ python manage.py makemigrations
$ python manage.py migrate
$ python manage.py runserver
```

Also create a superuser named `admin`:

```bash
python manage.py createsuperuser
```

Now, point your browser to [http://localhost:8000/ticket/purchase](http://localhost:8000/ticket/purchase) and log in as `admin`: you will see the list of open tickets, and you will be able to create new purchase tickets (if you give your flow another `root_name` you need to use that in the url). Create at least one ticket, requesting a new PC.


```python
# urls.py

urlpatterns = [
    # ...
    path("home", RedirectView.as_view(url=reverse_lazy('all_tickets', args=['purchase'])), name="home"),
    # ...
]
```


## Adding actions

An _action_ allows the user to attach an "update" to our ticket, possibly changing its state and other ticket data. For example, we define an action named `approve` to approve a purchase request. In your `PurchaseTicket` class, add the following method:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    @action(priority=1, verbose_name="Approve")
    @transition('state', 'new', 'approved')
    @transition('state', 'rejected', 'approved')
    def approve(self, ticket_update=None):
        return ticket_update
```

Here, we are defining a method named `approve` that will be called by `django-fsm-ticket` when the user performs the _approve_ action using the user interface. You may customize your action methods to react to user actions, for example by manipulating your ticket or ticket update instance, but in most cases, your methods will simply receive an instance `ticket_update` of model `TicketUpdate` and return it untouched, as in our example.

Our `approve` method has quite a few decorators! Going outward, we notice:

- One or more `transition` decorators. Each `transition` decorator allows our method to perform a transition, enabling the `state` field of our ticket to transition from the first to the second state. In our example, the following state transitions are allowed:
  - From `new` to `approved`
  - From `rejected` to `approved` (in case the approver mistakenly rejected a request or changed their mind)

  The _approve_ action will be available only for tickets in the state `new` or `rejected`. Note that the `transition` decorator is part of the `django-fsm-2` library, where you can find the full documentation of the decorator parameters and behavior.

- Exactly one `action` decorator, used to register `approve` as a `django-fsm-ticket` _action_. Our action has a couple of optional parameters:
  - A `verbose_name`, which will be shown in the user interface, e.g., in the button that the user presses to perform the action;
  - A `priority` float number, ranging from 0 to 1 (0.5 by default). If a user can perform several actions on a ticket, actions with higher priority are shown first.

Open the page [http://localhost:8000/ticket/purchase](http://localhost:8000/ticket/purchase) again. Your PC request ticket is now in the __Action required__ section instead of the __Open__ section, because you can perform an action on it. In other words, you are _in charge_ of this ticket.

Open your PC request and approve it, adding a comment "Request approved". Notice what happens after approval: your ticket state changes to `approved`, there is a new ticket update at the bottom of the ticket details page, and the __Approve__ button disappears because there is no _approve_ transition from this state.

If you go back to your ticket list page, your ticket will now appear in the bottom part of the page because you are no longer in charge of performing an action on the ticket.

As an exercise, write an action `reject` to bring a ticket from state `new` to state `rejected`.


## More on ticket priorities. Notifications

When multiple actions are possible on a ticket for a user, action buttons are sorted by decreasing priority. Priorities influence action behavior in other ways as well.

We have said that a user is in charge of a ticket if they can take at least one action on it. However, this is true for actions with a priority of at least 0.5. If a user can only take actions with lower priorities, they are not considered in charge of the ticket and will not see the ticket listed in the upper part of the ticket list page.

For example, let's add a low-priority action `comment` that allows any user to add a comment to the ticket without modifying its state. Conceptually, a user can add a comment without being in charge of the ticket:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    @action(priority=0.1, verbose_name="Comment")
    @transition('state', 'new', 'new')
    @transition('state', 'rejected', 'rejected')
    @transition('state', 'approved', 'approved')
    @transition('state', 'ordered', 'ordered')
    @transition('state', 'purchased', 'purchased')
    def comment(self, ticket_update=None):
        """
        Add a comment without changing ticket state
        """
        return ticket_update
```

Visually, actions with a high priority (at least 0.5) will generate a primary button (having Bootstrap class `btn-primary`), while lower priority actions will generate an outlined button (`btn-outline-primary`), and actions with priority of 0 will not show any button.

The set of users in charge of a ticket also influences notifications. If you call the `notify` method on a ticket instance, an email notification will be sent to all the users currently in charge of the ticket. You will usually call `notify` inside an action method: the email notification will be sent __after__ the state transition caused by the action itself. For example, we may modify the `approve` action like this:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    @action(priority=1, verbose_name='Approve')
    @transition('state', 'new', 'approved')
    @transition('state', 'rejected', 'approved')
    def approve(self, ticket_update=None):
        self.notify(ticket_update)
        return ticket_update
```

Don't forget to configure your email server in `settings.py`.

When a superuser approves the purchase request, the state transitions to `approved`, and afterward, an email is sent to users in charge of the next actions (which we still have to implement). In our workflow, the ticket will still be in charge of a superuser, who will attach an invoice once the item has been purchased. We may also want to notify the user that the request has been approved: it suffices to add the user that created the ticket (which is `self.user` in the method) to a list passed to `notify` using the optional parameter `additional_users`:

```python
self.notify(ticket_update, additional_users=[self.user])
```

Alternatively, if you want to send a notification _only_ to some specified users, you can use the optional parameter _users_. In the following example, a notification will be sent only to the user that opened the ticket and not to the users in charge of it:

```python
self.notify(ticket_update, users=[self.user])
```

Returning to priorities, an action with __priority 0__ will not generate a button and thus cannot be performed by a user through the generated user interface. However, action methods can always be called programmatically: thus 0-priority methods are useful to define actions that will be called, for example, upon successful completion of an asynchronous task (more on that in the [following section](#after-transition)) or through a web service. If you want to prevent a user from being able to perform an action, you shall define [permissions](#permissions).


## <a name="after-transition"></a>Calling methods after a transition. Async tasks


> [!NOTE]  
> This section is a bit advanced and usually unnecessary:
> feel free to skip it on your first pass of the tutorial.

If you are acquainted with the `django-fsm-2` library, you may have noticed an apparent inconsistency. In `django-fsm-2`, state transitions occur __after__ the execution of the transition method, if and only if no exceptions occur within the method execution. If an exception occurs, the transition is aborted.

`django-fsm-ticket` is based on `django-fsm-2`, and its behavior is the same. Thus, when we call the `notify` method, our ticket instance is still in its __source__ state (which is state `new` in our example). How can `notify` send notifications to the users in charge of the ticket in the destination state? If you open the source code of `django-fsm-ticket`, you will notice that the `notify` method has been decorated with the `@after_transition` decorator, defined in module `django_fsm_ticket.models.py`. A method decorated with `@after_transition` will not be called immediately. Instead, the call will be enqueued and executed _after_ the successful completion of the current transition, when the ticket has migrated to the destination state.

A common use of the `@after_transition` decorator is for handling long-running, asynchronous tasks. You can use the following pattern:

1. Ticket is in some state `ready_to_process`
2. The user performs an action __Run task__, which transitions the ticket to a state `processing`
3. The `run_task` action method calls a method `process`, which is decorated with `@after_transition`. Method `process` launches an async task, e.g. using [Celery](https://docs.celeryq.dev) or [Django Q](https://django-q.readthedocs.io).
4. Upon completion, the async task calls a 0-priority action method `task_done`, which transitions our ticket from state `processing` to some state `processing_done`.

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition, after_transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    @action(priority=1, verbose_name='Run task')
    @transition('state', 'ready_to_process', 'processing')
    def run_task(self, ticket_update=None):
        self.process()
        return ticket_update

    @after_transition
    def process(self):
        # In this example, let `async_task` be a function that performs a task asynchronously,
        # which takes some parameters (`parameters`) and a callback function `on_success`
        async_task(parameters, on_success=self.task_done)

    @action(priority=0)
    @transition('state', 'processing', 'processing_done')
    def task_done(self, ticket_update=None):
        return ticket_update
```

In this pattern, `process` is decorated with `@after_transition`. Thus, it will be executed only after the transition `ready_to_process` -> `processing` is successfully completed, and our ticket is in state `processing`. The method will then launch the async task and return immediately. The async task is configured to call our action `task_done` upon successful completion.

The outcome of the task may be attached to the ticket and/or to the [ticket update](#custom-updates) instance. If there are errors, our async task may call a different action method, to transition our task to some state `processing_errors`.


## <a name="permissions"></a>Permissions

So far, our purchase web app is neither private nor secure! Everyone can see tickets, and everyone can approve purchase requests. We need some rules:

1. Authentication is required to open and view tickets.
2. Superusers can see all the tickets.
3. Non-superusers can see only the tickets they created.
4. Only superusers can approve purchase requests.

In `django-fsm-ticket`, we can control:

- The visibility of each ticket.
- The visibility of each ticket update.
- The users allowed to perform each action.

Let's start with ticket visibility. In our `PurchaseTicket` class, we'll override the `is_visible` method, which takes a `request` instance as a parameter, to return `True` if and only if the instance should be visible to the user making the current request:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    def is_visible(self, request):
        if request.user.is_anonymous:
            return False
        if request.user.is_superuser:
            return True
        return self.user == request.user
```

When a user loads the ticket list page, `django-fsm-ticket` loops through all the tickets, determining the visibility of each ticket to the current user. To optimize this, we can prefilter the queryset of tickets to exclude tickets that should not be visible to the current user. We can override the `prefilter_visible` class method:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    @classmethod
    def prefilter_visible(cls, request):
        if request.user.is_anonymous:
            return cls.objects.none()
        if request.user.is_superuser:
            return cls.objects.all()
        return cls.objects.filter(user=request.user)
```

Tickets in the queryset returned by `prefilter_visible` will be double-checked for visibility by calling the `is_visible` method.

To limit the users who can take an action, you can use the `permission` optional attribute of the `django-fsm-2` `@transition` decorator. `permission` is a callable that takes the ticket instance and the user as parameters and returns `True` if and only if the transition is possible for the given ticket and user. If the transition is forbidden, the action button will not be displayed. Let's add permission to the `approve` action:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    def is_superuser(self, user):
        return user.is_superuser

    @action(priority=1, verbose_name='Approve')
    @transition('state', 'new', 'approved', permission=is_superuser)
    @transition('state', 'rejected', 'approved', permission=is_superuser)
    def approve(self, ticket_update=None):
        self.notify(ticket_update)
        return ticket_update
```

Here, we defined the method `is_superuser` to check if a given user is a superuser. We pass the `is_superuser` method to the `@transition` decorators using the `permission` parameter.


## <a name="custom-updates"></a>Custom ticket updates

The `purchase` action adds an element to the ticket history. The ticket detail page displays a card with the destination state (`approved`), a timestamp, the user who performed the action, and optional notes inserted by the user. In Django, this is achieved by creating an instance of the `TicketUpdate` model, which contains the aforementioned data.

What if we wish to add more data to a ticket update? Consider the following scenario: when a requested item is ordered, we want to transition our ticket to the `ordered` state, keeping track of:

- the price
- the seller's name

We can choose to add this data either globally to our ticket instance, by adding fields to our `PurchaseTicket` model, or to a custom ticket update model. If we customize our ticket update model, `django-fsm-ticket` will generate the fields in the action form for us, using a Django `ModelForm`.

So, first, let's define a custom model, `OrderTicketUpdate`, by deriving from the `TicketUpdate` model:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, TicketUpdate, action, transition
from django.db import models

class OrderTicketUpdate(TicketUpdate):
    template_fields = 'purchase/partials/orderticketupdate_fields.html'
    
    price = models.FloatField()
    seller = models.CharField(max_length=1000)
```

The `template_fields` variable specifies a custom partial template to display the update card, since our ticket update has additional fields. Let's define our partial template in `purchase/templates/purchase/partials/orderticketupdate_fields.html`:

```html
<!-- purchase/templates/purchase/partials/orderticketupdate_fields.html -->
<h3>Item ordered</h3>
<p>
  <strong>Price:</strong> {{ ticketupdate.price }}<br />
  <strong>Seller:</strong> {{ ticketupdate.seller }}<br />
</p>
<p>
  {{ ticketupdate.notes|linebreaks }}
</p>
```

In your partial template, refer to the ticket update instance using the template variable `{{ ticketupdate }}`. To refer to the ticket, you can use `ticketupdate.ticket`, for example, to display the ticket title: `{{ ticketupdate.ticket.title }}`.

Now we are ready to define our `order` action, binding it to the `OrderTicketUpdate` model:

```python
# purchase/models.py

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    @action(
        ticket_update_model=OrderTicketUpdate,
        verbose_name='Order',
    )
    @transition('state', 'approved', 'ordered', permission=is_superuser)
    def order(self, ticket_update=None):
        return ticket_update
```

Make and apply migrations, log in as a superuser, and perform the `order` action on an approved ticket.

The next step is receiving the item and transitioning to the `purchased` state. In this step, the user should attach an invoice to the ticket. We could define a custom ticket update model with a `FileField` for the invoice, define the custom template, and add a view to handle file download with the proper permissions. However, attaching a file to a ticket update is so common that a ready-to-use ticket update model exists in `django-fsm-ticket`: `AttachmentTicketUpdate`. We just need to define our action method `purchased`:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, TicketUpdate, AttachmentTicketUpdate
from django_fsm_ticket import action, transition
from django.db import models

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    @action(
        ticket_update_model=AttachmentTicketUpdate,
        verbose_name='Purchased',
    )
    @transition('state', 'ordered', 'purchased', permission=is_superuser)
    def purchased(self, ticket_update=None):
        if ticket_update.file:
            ticket_update.name = ticket_update.file.name
        return ticket_update
```

You may wonder about the purpose of the following code fragment:

```python
if ticket_update.file:
    ticket_update.name = ticket_update.file.name
```

Relative to a `TicketUpdate`, an `AttachmentTicketUpdate` has three additional fields:

- `file`: the optional attached file.
- `deleted`: a flag that can be set to `True` to mark the file as deleted, so it will no longer be downloadable (but still exists in the database).
- `name`: the original name of the file, or any other name that can be set in your action method.

It is useful to keep track of the original filename because Django will alter the stored filename to avoid name clashes. This is exactly what we did in our `purchased` action method.

The template for our `AttachmentTicketUpdate` is already defined in `django-fsm-ticket`, as well as the view that handles file download only for authorized users, so no other configuration is needed. As always, you are free to customize the template, as well as derive a new model from `AttachmentTicketUpdate` to add further fields.

If you want to allow your users to delete a previously uploaded attachment, simply define this action:

```python
@action(
    verbose_name='Delete file',
    ticket_update_model=TicketUpdate,
    priority=0,
)
@transition('state', 'purchased', 'purchased', permission=can_delete_attachment)
def delete_attachment(self, ticket_update=None):
    return ticket_update
```

Being a 0-priority action, `django-fsm-ticket` will not display an action button. However, a delete button will be displayed in the attachment card, next to the file to be deleted (thanks to how the custom partial template works). Make sure to override method `can_delete_attachment` if you wish to restrict users allowed to delete attachments.

## Calling actions programmatically

Sometimes you want to change the state of a ticket as a side-effect of some event, even at the creation of a new ticket. In order to do this, you can call the action method directly, e.g. you might want to override the `on_ticket_created` hook that, based on some parameter will decide whether to automatically accept or reject a request:

```python
# purchase/models.py

from django_fsm_ticket.models import Ticket, TicketEngine, action, transition

class PurchaseTicket(Ticket):
    # ...

    def on_ticket_created(self):
        super().on_ticket_created()
        if self.amount < 10:
            self.approve()
        elif self.amount > 1000000:
            self.reject()
```


## Further information

In order to learn how to use `django-fsm-ticket`, we suggest that you:

1. Read the documentation of [`django-fsm-2`](https://github.com/django-commons/django-fsm-2)
2. Study the demo project `example_project`
3. For advanced customization, read the inline documentation in `django_fsm_ticket/models.py`


## <a name="constance"></a>Configuration with `django-constance`

If you use `django-constance`, instead of defining a class named `FSM_TICKET_CONFIG`, you can create a variable with this name that coincides with your Constance `config` object. Note that you will use a single configuration for your project's need, including the configuration options for `django-fsm-ticket`. In the following snippet, we show how you can configure `django-fsm-ticket` using Constance:

```python
CONSTANCE_BACKEND = 'constance.backends.database.DatabaseBackend'
CONSTANCE_ADDITIONAL_FIELDS = {
    # ...
    'notification_level_select': ['django.forms.fields.ChoiceField', {
        'choices': (
            (0, "Force notifications off for all users"),
            (1, "Notifications off, except for users in group notifications_always"),
            (2, "Notifications on (default), except for users in group notifications_never"),
            (3, "Force notifications on for all users"),
        )
    }],
}

CONSTANCE_CONFIG = {
    'NOTIFICATION_LEVEL': (2, 'Notification level', 'notification_level_select'),
    # More configuration variables about your project here
}

import constance
FSM_TICKET_CONFIG = constance.config
```

### Configuring notifications

You can turn notifications on and off for specific users by creating two groups:
- `notifications_always`
- `notifications_never`

Users not belonging to one of these groups will receive notifications depending on the `NOTIFICATION_LEVEL` configuration variable. The notification level can be one of the following:

- __0__: Notifications are turned off for all users
- __1__: Notifications are turned off, but users in `notifications_always` group will still receive notifications
- __2__ (default): Notifications are turned on, but users in `notifications_never` group will not receive notifications
- __3__: Notifications are turned on for all users


## REST API

It is also possible to use `django-fsm-ticket` via a REST API, which can be useful for projects that do not use Django views and templates.

In order to avoid circular imports, it is possible to override `views` and `serializers` by providing the path as a string, allowing the import to be delayed.


### Getting started

Make sure that you installed `django-fsm-ticket` with the `[api]` extra, so that `django-rest-framework` is included in your installation:

```bash
pip install django-fsm-ticket[api]
```

Then, add `rest_framework` and `django_filters` to your `INSTALLED_APPS` in `settings.py`:

```python
# settings.py

INSTALLED_APPS = [
    # ...
    "polymorphic",
    "rest_framework",
    "django_filters",
    "django_fsm_ticket",
    # ...
]
```

In your `settings.py` file you may configure an API prefix by setting the `FSM_TICKET_API_PREFIX` constant. The default API prefix is `"api"`.


### API endpoints

Assuming that `django-fsm-ticket` has been configured under the path `ticket`, and that the API prefix is `"api"`, with the example application `purchase` the following endpoints are provided by default:

- `ticket/api/purchase`
  - GET: list of tickets
  - POST: create ticket
  - PUT/PATCH: update ticket

- `ticket/api/purchase/{id}`
  - GET: ticket detail
  - PUT/PATCH: update ticket
  - DELETE: delete ticket

- `ticket/api/purchase/{id}/{action}`
  - PUT/PATCH: apply action to the ticket

- `ticket/api/purchase/ticket-update`
  - GET: list of all ticket updates referring to a `PurchaseTicket`

- `ticket/api/purchase/ticket-update/{id}`
  - GET: details of a ticket update referring to a `PurchaseTicket`

they are described in more detail below.


#### Ticket list and create

The endpoint `ticket/api/{root_name}` returns a list of tickets corresponding to the indicated `root_name`. The view and serializers are generated automatically. The tickets are filtered using `prefilter_visible`.

It is possible to provide a custom list serializer specifying `list_serializer` on the `Ticket` class.

It is also possible to provide a custom view class (it has to provide `as_view()`) by declaring `list_api_view` on the `Ticket` class.

The default view provides

- pagination using `limit` and `offset`
- ordering on all fields, the default ordering is descending on the `id` field
- filtering on all fields except `exclude_fields` declared on the `Ticket` class, plus filtering out closed tickets through the `hide_closed` boolean filter
- searching on the `search_fields` declared on the `Ticket` class

A ticket can be created by doing a `POST` on the endpoint providing the data for the new ticket. The serializer for ticket creation can be overridden by specifying the `write_serializer` on the `Ticket` class. This will typically be necessary when the ticket has relations to other models that are not handled automatically by the DRF `ModelSerializer`.

Note that creation is restricted by calling `can_create(user)` on the `Ticket` model.


#### Ticket detail and update

The endpoint `ticket/api/{root_name}/{id}` returns the details of a ticket. The view can be overridden by specifying `detail_api_view` on the `Ticket` class (is has to provide `as_view()`).

It is possible to provide a custom serializer specifying `detail_serializer` on the `Ticket` class. Note however that the default detail serializer provides a list of the `actions` possible on the ticket by the requesting user. If you make your own serializer you will probably want to do that as well. The default serializer also includes all `TicketUpdate` instances of the ticket.

A `POST` or `PUT` will update the given ticket; the action is restricted by calling `can_modify(user)` on the `Ticket` model.

The update serializer is the same as for the ticket creation, i.e. can be overridden by specifying `write_serializer`.

A `DELETE` will delete a ticket. This is disabled by default and can be enabled through the `can_delete(user)` on the `Ticket` class.


#### Ticket action

By making a `PUT` on `ticket/api/{root_name}/{id}/{action}`, the specified action will be applied, using the payload for the creation of the `TicketUpdate`.

The serializer is therefore related to the `ticket_update_model` specified in the `action`, excluding `exclude_fields` on the model (`ts`, `user`, etc are excluded by default). In order to override the serializer you need to specify the `write_serializer` on the ticket update class.

Currently this view cannot be overridden.


#### Ticket update list

The endpoint `ticket/api/{root_name}/ticket-update` provides a list of all `TicketUpdate`s referring to the specified `root_name`. The view can be overridden by specifying `ticket_update_list_api_view` on the `TicketClass` (note: not on the `TicketUpdate` class).

Each ticket update is serialized separately, using `list_serializer` on the `TicketUpdate` class if specified. In this way different types of `TicketUpdate`s will still be able to include all fields.

The default view provides

- pagination using `limit` and `offset`
- ordering on all fields, the default ordering is descending on the `id` field
- filtering on `notes`, `user__id`, `ticket__id`
- filtering on the `TicketUpdate` type by using the `TicketUpdate` model name in lowercase (e.g. `ticketupdate`); the possible filters are
  - `?type={type}`: only include `TicketUpdate`s of this type
  - `?type__not={type}`: exclude `TicketUpdate`s of this type
  - `?type__in={type1,type2}`: only include `TicketUpdate`s of any of these types
- searching is only provided on `notes` since it is the common field of all `TicketUpdate`s

This view only allows `GET` requests.


#### Ticket update detail

The endpoint `ticket/api/{root_name}/ticket-update/{id}` provides the details of the given `TicketUpdate`. The serializer can be overridden by specifying `detail_serializer` on the `TicketUpdate` class, as the serializer will be determined after the object has been retrieved.

This view only allows `GET` requests.
